1. Pausing the DAG
Statement:

When you pause a DAG, Airflow will not schedule any new task instances for that DAG. Any previously scheduled task instances that have not yet started will remain in a "Queued" state and will not be executed.

Assessment: False

Explanation:

No New DAG Runs Scheduled: True. When a DAG is paused, the Airflow scheduler stops initiating new DAG runs based on the DAG's schedule interval. This means no new scheduled task instances will be created.

Previously Scheduled Task Instances:

If Queued but Not Yet Executed: Partially True. If a DAG run was already scheduled before the DAG was paused, the task instances within that run may still be executed depending on their state and the exact timing of the pause.
Queued Tasks After Pause: False. Task instances that were queued after the DAG was paused will not be executed. However, tasks already in progress or scheduled before the pause may continue based on their state.
Conclusion: The first part of the statement is accurate regarding new DAG runs, but the behavior of previously scheduled tasks is not entirely as described.

2. Existing Task Instances
Statement:

Any task instances that are currently running when the DAG is paused will continue to run to completion. Airflow will not interrupt or stop these running tasks.

Assessment: True

Explanation:

Running Tasks Continue: True. Pausing a DAG does not affect task instances that are already running. These tasks will continue executing until they complete or fail naturally.

No Interruption: True. Airflow does not forcibly terminate or interrupt running tasks when a DAG is paused. The pause action solely affects the scheduling of new task instances.

Conclusion: This statement accurately reflects Airflow's behavior concerning running task instances when a DAG is paused.

3. New Triggered Runs
Statement:

If the DAG has a schedule interval and new runs are triggered while the DAG is paused, those new DAG runs will be created but the task instances within them will not be scheduled.

Assessment: Partially False

Explanation:

Manual Triggered DAG Runs: False as per statement. By default, manually triggered DAG runs are allowed even if the DAG is paused. The task instances within these manually triggered runs will be scheduled and executed.

Automated Triggered Runs: True. Automated DAG runs based on the schedule interval will not be created or executed when the DAG is paused.

Conclusion: The statement incorrectly implies that all triggered DAG runs (including manual ones) will not have their task instances scheduled. In reality, only automated scheduled runs are prevented from being created and executed when a DAG is paused. Manual triggers are still possible and their tasks will run.

4. Backfill and Manual Runs
Statement:

You can still manually trigger a DAG run or perform a backfill (running past missed schedules) even if the DAG is paused. However, the task instances within these manual/backfill runs will not be scheduled.

Assessment: False

Explanation:

Manual Triggered DAG Runs:
Allowed: True. You can manually trigger DAG runs even if the DAG is paused.
Task Execution: False. Task instances within manually triggered DAG runs will be scheduled and executed as normal.
Backfill Runs:
Allowed: True. Backfilling (executing past DAG runs) is possible even when a DAG is paused.
Task Execution: False. Similar to manual triggers, task instances within backfilled runs will be scheduled and executed.
Conclusion: While it's correct that you can initiate manual and backfill runs on a paused DAG, it's incorrect to state that their task instances will not be scheduled. In reality, these tasks will execute as expected.

5. Sensor and Trigger Tasks
Statement:

If the paused DAG contains any sensor or trigger tasks, those tasks will also not be executed while the DAG is paused.

Assessment: Partially False

Explanation:

Sensor and Trigger Tasks in Paused DAGs:
When DAG is Paused: True that no new task instances will be scheduled. If the DAG is paused, no new DAG runs will be created, so sensor or trigger tasks within those runs won't be initiated.
Existing or Manually Triggered Runs: False. If there are DAG runs that were triggered before pausing or are manually triggered, their sensor or trigger tasks will execute as normal.
Conclusion: The statement is partially true. Sensor and trigger tasks won't execute within newly scheduled DAG runs (since no new runs are created when paused), but they will execute within existing or manually triggered DAG runs.

6. Downstream Dependencies
Statement:

If the paused DAG has any downstream dependencies, those dependent DAGs will also be affected. The downstream DAGs will not be triggered as long as the upstream DAG remains paused.

Assessment: False

Explanation:

DAG Dependencies: Airflow does not inherently manage DAG dependencies based on the pause state of upstream DAGs. If you have DAGs set up with dependencies (e.g., using ExternalTaskSensor or other mechanisms), the behavior depends on how those dependencies are implemented.

Pause State Impact: False. Simply pausing an upstream DAG does not automatically prevent downstream DAGs from being triggered unless the dependency logic explicitly checks the paused state.

Conclusion: The paused state of an upstream DAG does not inherently impact the execution of downstream DAGs. Any such behavior must be explicitly implemented within the DAGs' dependency logic.

7. Resume Execution
Statement:

When you resume the paused DAG, Airflow will start scheduling new task instances again based on the DAG's schedule. Any queued task instances will be executed, and new scheduled runs will proceed as normal.

Assessment: True

Explanation:

Resuming DAGs:
New DAG Runs: True. Once a DAG is resumed, Airflow's scheduler will start creating new DAG runs based on the DAG's schedule interval.

Queued Task Instances: True. If there are task instances that were queued before the DAG was paused (and were not executed due to the pause), resuming the DAG will allow these queued tasks to be scheduled and executed.

Normal Operation: True. After resuming, the DAG functions as it did prior to being paused, with task instances being scheduled and run as per the schedule.

Conclusion: This statement accurately describes Airflow's behavior when a paused DAG is resumed.

8. Missed Schedules
Statement:

If the DAG was paused for a significant period of time, there may be missed schedules that Airflow will not automatically catch up on when the DAG is resumed. You may need to manually trigger a backfill to execute the missed DAG runs.

Assessment: True

Explanation:

Missed DAG Runs During Pause: True. If a DAG is paused, Airflow will not create DAG runs for the scheduled intervals that occur during the pause period.

No Automatic Catch-up: True. When the DAG is resumed, Airflow does not automatically backfill or create DAG runs for the periods when the DAG was paused.

Manual Intervention Needed: True. To execute the missed DAG runs, you would need to manually trigger them or perform a backfill operation.

Conclusion: This statement correctly outlines the need for manual actions to handle missed schedules when a DAG has been paused for an extended duration.

Summary Table
Statement	True/False	Notes
1. Pausing the DAG	Partially False	New DAG runs are not scheduled; queued tasks may still execute based on timing.
2. Existing Task Instances	True	Running tasks continue unaffected by the pause.
3. New Triggered Runs	Partially False	Manual triggers are allowed and tasks within them are executed; only scheduled runs are blocked.
4. Backfill and Manual Runs	False	Manual and backfill runs are allowed and their tasks are executed despite the DAG being paused.
5. Sensor and Trigger Tasks	Partially False	Sensor/trigger tasks in new runs are not executed; existing or manual runs still execute them.
6. Downstream Dependencies	False	Pausing an upstream DAG does not inherently affect downstream DAGs unless explicitly coded to do so.
7. Resume Execution	True	Resuming a DAG allows new DAG runs and queued tasks to be scheduled and executed normally.
8. Missed Schedules	True	Missed scheduled runs during the pause require manual backfill or triggering to execute.
Additional Insights
Manual vs. Scheduled Runs:

Scheduled Runs: Automatically created DAG runs based on the DAG's schedule_interval. These are prevented from being created when the DAG is paused.
Manual Runs: Triggered by users via the Airflow UI, CLI, or API. These runs are allowed and their task instances are executed regardless of the DAG's pause state.
Task States:

Queued: Tasks in this state are waiting to be picked up by a worker. If the DAG is paused after they are queued, their execution is halted.
Running: As confirmed, running tasks continue to execute even if the DAG is paused during their execution.
Downstream Dependencies:

Explicit Control Needed: If you rely on downstream DAGs being triggered based on upstream DAG runs, you must implement logic that checks the pause state if you want to prevent downstream triggers when the upstream DAG is paused.
Best Practices:

Monitoring: Always monitor DAG states and task executions, especially after pausing or resuming DAGs, to ensure expected behaviors.
Documentation: Clearly document the reasons for pausing DAGs and any manual interventions required to handle missed schedules or dependencies.



from airflow import DAG
from airflow.operators.dummy import DummyOperator
from airflow.utils.dates import days_ago
from datetime import timedelta

default_args = {
    'owner': 'airflow',
    'depends_on_past': False,
    'email': ['alerts@yourdomain.com'],
    'email_on_failure': False,
    'email_on_retry': False,
    'retries': 1,
    'retry_delay': timedelta(minutes=5),
}

with DAG(
    dag_id='data_engineering_1',
    default_args=default_args,
    description='Data Engineering DAG',
    schedule_interval='@daily',
    start_date=days_ago(1),
    catchup=False,
    max_active_runs=1,  # Restricts to one active run at a time
    tags=['data_engineering'],
) as dag:

    start = DummyOperator(
        task_id='start'
    )

    end = DummyOperator(
        task_id='end'
    )

    start >> end
